Add ADR for LTI providers in content libraries [SE-4215] (#27089)
edx/edx-platform: openedx/core/djangoapps/content_libraries/docs/decisions/0002-libraries-lti-provider.rst

> Allow content libraries to used by LTI consumers

Reviewer: Think you missed a spot, here. :)

------------------------------------------------

Status
------

Pending

Context
-------

Currently, there's no way for xblocks in blockstore-based content libraries to be served to other LTI consumers. This ADR explores ways in which this can be achieved, without overly complicating the codebase. The platform currently does have an :code:`lms.lti_provider` app which implements the LTI 1.1 spec, but it only works for modulestore-based courses, and the LTI 1.1 spec itself is also deprecated and deemed insecure.

Decision
--------

We will use the latest LTI spec (`LTI 1.3`_) to serve the xblocks. This would be largely independent of the existing LTI 1.1 implementation, and would barely require any changes in that app.

> Instead, we would add an :code:`lti` package to the :code:`openedx.core.content_libraries` app, which will handle LTI endpoints, and communicate with the LTI consumers. It would be a good idea to use a package like `pylti1.3`_ which can handle the LTI-spec implementation, which saves a lot of development and testing effort, and keeps the platform codebase relevant to openedx.

Reviewer: This is a "decision record", after all, so we shouldn't use phrases like "it would be a good idea".  We just go right out and say: "We will use pylti1.3".

Reviewer: Oh, and add an actual link to the library, which seems to be missing here.

Also add information that the library is active and maintained, being used in projects X and Y (with links to them), and has a usable PyPi package.

Reviewer: AND (sorry), also link to the PR that originally meant to introduce this library, to demonstrate that 1) the author has community-awareness (a very good thing), and 2) we should feel a little guilty for not having nurtured his PR forward. :P

Author: Excellent notes, thanks! I did link the library below btw, you can visit the rendered file at https://github.com/open-craft/edx-platform/blob/mavidser/se-4215-content-lib-lti-adr/openedx/core/djangoapps/content_libraries/docs/decisions/0002-libraries-lti-provider.rst

.. _LTI 1.3: http://www.imsglobal.org/activity/learning-tools-interoperability
.. _pylti1.3: https://github.com/dmitry-viskov/pylti1.3

Consequences
------------

> Once implemented, content from blockstore-based libraries can be easily embedded into other LMS platforms. This is made easier by the fact that these libraries are deisgned to be embeddable, and can be easily rendered inside iframes.

Reviewer: I would also add that library content can be used independently of courseware, including the ability to forward learner scoring via LTI..

> The rest of the functionality would be similar to how the current LTI provider works, having similar LTI login, setup, and grade syncing.

Reviewer: I would add information to the effect that the new endpoints will be libraries-v2 specific.

Allow content libraries to be used by LTI consumers
---------------------------------------------------

Status
------

Pending

Context
-------

Currently, there's no way for xblocks in blockstore-based content libraries to be served to other LTI consumers. This ADR explores ways in which this can be achieved, without overly complicating the codebase. The platform currently does have an :code:`lms.lti_provider` app which implements the LTI 1.1 spec, but it only works for modulestore-based courses, and the LTI 1.1 spec itself is also deprecated and deemed insecure.

Decision
--------

We will use the latest LTI spec (`LTI 1.3`_) to serve the xblocks. This would be largely independent of the existing LTI 1.1 implementation, and would barely require any changes in that app.

> Instead, we would add an :code:`lti` package to the :code:`openedx.core.content_libraries` app, which will handle LTI endpoints, and communicate with the LTI consumers. We will use the actively-maintained `pylti1.3`_ package which can handle the LTI-spec implementation, which saves a lot of development and testing effort, and keeps the platform codebase relevant to openedx. The library is maintained by `@dmitry-viskov`_, who also proposed using it in an `earlier PR`_ to add LTI 1.3 support for courses. `pylti1.3`_ exists as an up-to-date `PyPi package`_, and is also used by projects like `my-learning-analytics`_, and `NimbleWise (source)`_.

Reviewer 2: What about all the concerns listed in that earlier PR? https://github.com/edx/edx-platform/pull/21435#pullrequestreview-455386016 I think this ADR should address them if we're proposing a similar approach.

Reviewer 3: > What about all the concerns listed in that earlier PR?

Here's a summary of the concerns captured in the aforementioned PR.

1. Reliability and maintainability of the LTI implementation being adopted.
2. Caveats around auto user creation: (a.) User not enrolled in any course, (b.) Linking with existing user accounts, (c.) Authenticated users accessing content from different views.
3. Isolated content during launches.

The ADR already addresss some of the above:

- (1.) The doc is advocating `pylti1p3` as enough by indirectly trusting its usage and credibility in other tools, some of them certified, according to the library author.
- (3.) This is somewhat irrelevant since this ADR is proposing exactly that: Using content libraries to offer and launch isolated content that by definition was designed to be embeddable in isolation of courseware and can be easily rendered inside iframes.

What the ADR doesn't specify is how authorization and authentication will be done for content libraries (topic (2.)).

Let's discuss them on top of the [PR being proposed](https://github.com/edx/edx-platform/pull/27411), which basically follows the same approach of the LTI 1.1.

a. Course enrollement is irrelevant since content is independent.
b. There is no use case for user association, AFAIK. But the current spec doesn't block that either. As mentioned, LTI has some tooling to aid this type of association. Augmenting the implementation to add support for those is possible.
c. There is currently no objection to keeping the same approach used by LTI 1.1 for LTI 1.3. AFAIK, once authenticated, the user could access other "parts" of edx with no impact on functionality.

> I think this ADR should address them if we're proposing a similar approach.

I think it is valuable to include the following:

1. Mention why we are not going to onboard user profile and mapping betwen tool and platform, but acknowledging its existence.
1. Mention the implications of user creation at launch, more likely in the Consequences section.

Does it makes sense to you?

Reviewer 2: Sounds good, thanks.

Decision
--------

We will use the latest LTI spec (`LTI 1.3`_) to serve the xblocks. This would be independent of the existing LTI 1.1 implementation, and will not require any changes in that app.

Instead, we will add additional code to :code:`openedx.core.content_libraries` application to handle LTI endpoints and communicate with the LTI consumers. We will use the actively-maintained `pylti1.3`_ package which can handle the LTI-spec implementation, which saves a lot of development and testing effort, and keeps the platform codebase relevant to openedx. The library is maintained by `@dmitry-viskov`_, who also proposed using it in an `earlier PR`_ to add LTI 1.3 support for courses. `pylti1.3`_ exists as an up-to-date `PyPi package`_, and is also used by projects like `my-learning-analytics`_, and `NimbleWise (source)`_.

> Only two aspects of the LTI 1.3 spec family will be supported: Resource link launches and Assignment and Grading Services. Additional aspects of the implementation will not be supported, in particular, `LTI NRPS`_. Although they provide value for customers, we will focus on leaving the door open for them in the future.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Only two aspects of the LTI 1.3 spec family will be supported: Resource link launches and Assignment and Grading Services. Additional aspects of the implementation will not be supported, in particular, `LTI NRPS`_ and Deep Linking. Although they provide value for customers, we will focus on leaving the door open for them in the future.
```

> The rest of the functionality would be similar to how the current LTI 1.1 provider works, having similar authentication, setup, and grade syncing, except for any changes required for the LTI 1.3 protocol. However, the new endpoints would be specific to blockstore-based content libraries and would not directly interact with modulestore-courses in any form. Authorization will rely on an association between the LTI platform and libraries.  Users will manage this 1:N relationship through the admin interface.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The rest of the functionality would be similar to how the current LTI 1.1 provider works, having similar authentication, setup, and grade syncing, except for any changes required for the LTI 1.3 protocol. However, the new endpoints would be specific to blockstore-based content libraries and would not directly interact with modulestore-courses in any form. Authorization will rely on an association between the LTI platform and libraries.  Site operators will manage this 1:N relationship through the admin interface.
```

Decision
--------

We will use the latest LTI spec (`LTI 1.3`_) to serve the xblocks. This would be independent of the existing LTI 1.1 implementation, and will not require any changes in that app.

Instead, we will add additional code to :code:`openedx.core.content_libraries` application to handle LTI endpoints and communicate with the LTI consumers. We will use the actively-maintained `pylti1.3`_ package which can handle the LTI-spec implementation, which saves a lot of development and testing effort, and keeps the platform codebase relevant to openedx. The library is maintained by `@dmitry-viskov`_, who also proposed using it in an `earlier PR`_ to add LTI 1.3 support for courses. `pylti1.3`_ exists as an up-to-date `PyPi package`_, and is also used by projects like `my-learning-analytics`_, and `NimbleWise (source)`_.

Only two aspects of the LTI 1.3 spec family will be supported: Resource link launches and Assignment and Grading Services. Additional aspects of the implementation will not be supported, in particular, `LTI NRPS`_ and Deep Linking. Although they provide value for customers, we will focus on leaving the door open for them in the future.

> The rest of the functionality would be similar to how the current LTI 1.1 provider works, having similar authentication, setup, and grade syncing, except for any changes required for the LTI 1.3 protocol. However, the new endpoints would be specific to blockstore-based content libraries and would not directly interact with modulestore-courses in any form. Authorization will rely on an association between the LTI platform and libraries, exclusively, and will not support public LTI launches. Site operators will manage this 1:N relationship through the admin interface.

Reviewer 2: I think 1:N is a problem here, and that each library needs to be able to host content for multiple external LMS platforms. I've seen that use case several times, and not supporting it will lead to people duplicating entire libraries just to authorize additional platforms, something we definitely don't want. It should be N:N I think (a single library can serve content to multiple external LMS platforms, and/or a single external LMS platform can consume content from multiple Open edX libraries without being configured separately each time).

Reviewer 3: Oh, yes, we [discussed this][1]:

[1]: https://github.com/edx/edx-platform/pull/27089#issuecomment-845357272

> If that sounds too open, what do you think of having a 1:N association between LTI platforms and Libraries? During the LTI launch, we can authorize based on this association. It means only a specific platform and its users can access the library's content. It would require an additional admin setup for customers though. An certainly would be great if we could add this to the UI (e.g. "Enable LTI" button per library with previously configured platform selection).
> 
> Of course, other authorization schemas are also possible. But the above seems a good tradeoff between complexity and security.

Considering there are use-cases for N:M, I think it makes sense to change your mind about it at this point. Please, just confirm if this is your final stand, and I'll update the doc, and of course, [the patch](https://github.com/edx/edx-platform/pull/27411).

Reviewer 2: > Oh, yes, we discussed this:

Ah, sorry, I guess I didn't fully realize the implications of what you were saying at the time, nor did I reply usefully. I wish I had flagged this for you earlier, and I hope it won't require too much re-working.

I definitely think we'll need to support multiple LTI platforms using a single library. In fact a different group at MIT already has mentioned that use case to us, and it's come up with other projects in the past.

Reviewer 3: @bradenmacdonald:

> I definitely think we'll need to support multiple LTI platforms using a single library.

Updated the ADR accordingly. I'll start working on the changes in the code to reflect this decision. Thank you.
